ah magnets I like to think of them as
gravity's little cousin really is this
guy gonna talk about Magnus for 10
minutes well fine
how about volcanoes oh yeah exploding
mountains would you ever have guessed
that a mere magnet could be thrown the
largest volcano on this planet possibly
even in this solar system Oh
magnets just got a lot more interesting
huh
yeah cool what does it blow up okay stay
with me now that former king of
volcanoes is called tamo massive and
massive it is it sprawls over an area of
120,000 square miles for comparison
that's about the size of New Mexico the
fifth largest state in the US hmm can't
recall hearing about volcanoes cousin
the size of an already sizable state but
maybe I wasn't paying attention
oh it's an extinct volcano sleeping at
the bottom of the Pacific Ocean 1,000
miles east of Japan that explains it
it's record-breaking size results partly
from its location as the volcano sits at
the intersection of three underwater
fault lines those in turn happen to be
part of a larger system geologist called
the Ring of Fire
hey that rings a bell where and how it
was formed explains why it's so
ginormous but I'll get to that later
for now what's with the exotic sounding
name it must mean something epic like
fire master in a language I don't know
not quite
tamo is simply an acronym for Texas A&M
University while massive is a French
word used in geology to describe certain
types of mountains based on how they
form it's also a French for massive
because what else are they gonna call it
on the long list of famous volcanoes we
all know since grade school Vesuvius st.
Helens Fujii Krakatoa why haven't heard
of Tamil Massif it's supposedly the
largest of them all the thing is this
sleeping giant hasn't erupted in
long time I'm talking 150 million years
back during the peak of dinosaur times
but just because this volcano has
apparently decided to retire
that doesn't mean nothing's happening
there mainly it's a massive source of
magnetic anomalies that's the fancy way
of saying disruptions in the Earth's
magnetism you see the molten layers
beneath the planet's crust are rich in
metals like iron nickel and cobalt all
of those are known for their magnetic
properties so when you get a whole bunch
of them say 120,000 square miles worth
you're bound to produce a magnetic
anomaly wait free wine let's go back to
the molten layers beneath Earth's crust
okay you might remember hearing about
magma back in school when you were
learning about volcanoes and making
those cool exploding models magma is
sort of a gooey hot semi liquid beneath
or within the Earth's crust
yup it's under your feet right now hot
since it's less dense than solid rock it
naturally flows upward sometimes finding
an exit through a volcano it might lose
out or explode in a fiery rage depending
on the gaseous pressure behind it once a
volcano erupts those magnetically
charged metals iron nickel and cobalt
come to the surface in large amounts a
volcano as big as tamo massive is going
to have some outstanding eruptions
especially when it's in a geological hot
spot like the Ring of Fire the question
that drew many scientists to the scene
was exactly how large these eruptions
were and how many there were in all
entered dr. William Sager the marine
geophysicist who discovered the volcano
when he was a professor at Texas A&M
when he and his team released the first
measurements of tamo massive in 2013 the
undersea volcano skyrocketed to the top
of the scoreboard not only did it
dethrone Hawaii's Mauna LOA's as the
largest volcano on Earth it even
surpassed Olympus Mons on Mars to become
the biggest known volcano
in the solar system well as far as
surface area goes impressive for a
mountain nobody even knew existed until
recently unfortunately for the reigning
champ its glory would be short-lived
back when it won mount universe 2013
researchers were pretty sure a single
massive eruption had formed tamo massive
before the volcano burned itself out but
like all good scientists dr. Sager and
his team wanted to test their theory and
make sure so they began studying the
volcano's magnetic anomalies you see the
Earth's magnetic field goes through
natural cycles over the course of
several million years you can imagine
our planet like a giant magnet right now
the North Pole is positively charged
while the South is negative that's why a
compass will still point north even in
the southern hemisphere
however the poles will gradually reverse
over millions of years and lost hikers
will be confused to no end when a
volcano erupts the expelled lava carries
with it the magnetic charge it had when
it was part of the Earth's mantle it
also keeps that charge even as the
Earth's magnetic field continues to
shift by examining these magnetic
anomalies researchers hope to get a
better understanding of tamo massives
life cycle what they found was that this
thing isn't exactly a volcano at least
not a single one originally they thought
it was a regular shield volcano only
much bigger than any others on this
planet shield volcanoes form when magma
loses out piles up on itself and cools
over time this forms a giant mound that
looks like a shield lying on the ground
it's the name the mountain would have
uniform magnetism throughout since the
magma that spilled up and over would
cover it entirely and spread those
magnetic metals out evenly
but that's not the case with tamo
massive it has stripes of magnetic
anomalies that point to it popping up a
different way they now think that it's a
sort of volcanic system formed through
seafloor spreading this is when an ocean
ridge spreads apart
new material forms in the center and the
older stuff goes out to the edges new
material Wells up from the middle
instead of being added to the top in the
form of dry lava like in shield
volcanoes
tamo massive strike magnetic anomalies
point to gradual seafloor spreading over
a couple million years not volcanic
formation from hardened lava in short
the crown went back to Hawaii's Mauna
Loa but 1000 massive is still getting a
lot of attention from geologists while
bulges in the Earth's crust exist all
over this is the only known example with
a massive volcanic system sitting on top
so temu don't feel bad about losing your
spot as Earth's biggest volcano
you're still one-of-a-kind I feel better
then again there are plenty of other
volcanoes that are just as unique and
puzzling heading over to the Atlantic
geologist recently found something very
interesting just off the shores of
Bermuda all the ships and planes that
disappeared in its infamous triangle not
exactly but still just as newsworthy
most volcanoes in the Caribbean sprang
up along fault lines you know just like
how the Pacific plate is bumping elbows
with its neighbors creating the Ring of
Fire
but the undersea volcano that created
the island of Bermuda is well within the
North American tectonic plate odd indeed
for many years geologists assumed that
Bermuda had formed over a volcanic
hotspot just like Hawaii to prove that
long-held theory scientists from around
the world got together to examine a 26
hundred foot sample drilled from the
center of the dormant volcano what they
found ended up being something nobody
had ever seen in this world Atlantis if
only
they discovered that the island formed
due to unusual activity in what
geologists call the transition zone it's
a region of the Earth's mantle about 250
miles below sea level the researchers
noticed that the chemical composition of
the rocks resembles those found at that
extreme depth they have much more water
and crystallized minerals than are
usually found in the relatively
shallower upper mantle which is where
most volcanic magma originates because
Earth's molten interior is constantly
shifting an upwelling occurred around 60
million years ago that material from the
transition zone found itself sucked into
the upper mantle from there the pressure
moved it toward the surface and the
molten rock eventually burned its way
through the crust this phenomenon
created a temporary hotspot from which
the volcano and later the island of
Bermuda itself could form no one knew
that volcanoes could come about this way
now that we do know they can scientists
are scrambling to find more examples of
this strange phenomenon they're
confident that if such an exists could
occur once it must have happened before
in fact it's likely that many existing
volcanoes have been misidentified as
having formed in a more conventional way
between this and the revelation of tamo
massives true nature it's an exciting
time for geologists just when you think
there's nothing left to discover our
world continues to surprise us hey have
you ever seen a volcano in real life
would you want to let me know down below
and if you learn something new today
then give the video a thumbs up and
share it with a friend but hey don't go
lava surfing just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out lots more about volcanoes
too just click on this left or right
video and enjoy stay on the bright side
of life